.TH DCR 1 "2026-06-02" "dcr 0.7.0" "DCR Manual"
.SH NAME
dcr \- Cargo\-like build tool and package manager for C/C++ projects
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dcr
[\fIcommand\fR] [\fIoptions\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
DCR is a comprehensive build tool and package manager for C and C++ projects,
inspired by Cargo from the Rust ecosystem. It handles project creation,
building, dependency management, testing, formatting, and IDE integration.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B new \fI<name>\fR
Create a new C/C++ project with the given name. Only ASCII letters, digits,
underscores and hyphens are allowed.
.TP
.B init
Initialize the current (empty) directory as a DCR project.
.TP
.B build [\fIoptions\fR]
Compile the project. Default profile is \fB\-\-debug\fR.
.TP
.B run [\fIoptions\fR]
Build and run the project. Only available for binary projects.
.TP
.B clean [\fIoptions\fR]
Remove build artifacts from the target directory.
.TP
.B test [\fI\-\-init\fR] [\fI\-\-debug\fR|\fI\-\-release\fR]
Run project tests (alias: \fBdcr tests\fR).
.TP
.B add \fI<name>\fR \fI<source>\fR [\fIoptions\fR]
Add a dependency to the project.
.TP
.B tree
Display the dependency tree of the current project.
.TP
.B fmt
Format all C/C++ source files using clang-format.
.TP
.B gen \fI<subcommand>\fR
Generate IDE integration files (vscode, clion, compile-commands, project-info).
.TP
.B setup
Set up DCR registries for dependency resolution.
.SH GLOBAL FLAGS
.TP
.B \-\-help
Show this help message and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print version information and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-update
Update DCR to the latest version from GitHub Releases.
.SH BUILD OPTIONS
The following options apply to \fBbuild\fR and \fBrun\fR commands:
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Build with debug profile (default). Enables debug symbols and minimal optimization.
.TP
.B \-\-release
Build with release profile. Enables full optimization without debug symbols.
.TP
.B \-\-target \fI<triple>\fR
Cross-compile for the given target (e.g. \fBaarch64-linux-gnu\fR, \fBx86_64-w64-mingw32\fR).
Short names like \fBlinux\fR, \fBmacos\fR, \fBwindows\fR are also supported.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Force a full rebuild, ignoring cached build artifacts.
.TP
.B \-\-clean
Clean build artifacts before building.
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Print detailed build output including compiler commands.
.TP
.B \-\-workspace \fI<name>\fR
Build a specific workspace member.
.SH CLEAN OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Clean debug artifacts (default).
.TP
.B \-\-release
Clean release artifacts.
.TP
.B \-\-target \fI<triple>\fR
Clean artifacts for a specific target.
.TP
.B \-\-all
Clean all workspace members.
.SH ADD OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-branch \fI<name>\fR
Use a specific branch when adding a git dependency.
.TP
.B \-\-tag \fI<name>\fR
Use a specific tag when adding a git dependency.
.TP
.B \-\-rev \fI<hash>\fR
Use a specific commit hash when adding a git dependency.
.SH DEPENDENCY SOURCES
.TP
.B user/repo
GitHub shorthand (e.g. \fBuser/repo\fR).
.TP
.B github:user/repo
Full GitHub repository URL shorthand.
.TP
.B gitlab:user/repo
GitLab repository URL shorthand.
.TP
.B git:host.com/user/repo
Generic git repository.
.TP
.B path:./path/to/lib
Local path dependency.
.TP
.B \fI<version>\fR
Version from registry (e.g. \fB1.2.3\fR).
.SH GEN SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B project-info
Print project metadata as JSON to stdout.
.TP
.B compile-commands
Generate \fBcompile_commands.json\fR for IDE tooling.
.TP
.B vscode
Generate \fB.vscode/\fR integration files (tasks, launch configurations).
.TP
.B clion
Generate \fB.idea/\fR integration files for CLion.
.SH TEST OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-init
Create \fBtests/dcr_test.h\fR in the current project.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Build and run tests with debug profile (default).
.TP
.B \-\-release
Build and run tests with release profile.
.SH PROJECT CONFIGURATION
DCR uses \fBdcr.toml\fR for project configuration. Key settings include:
.TP
.B package.name
Project name (required).
.TP
.B package.version
Project version (default: \fB0.1.0\fR).
.TP
.B build.language
Programming language: \fBc\fR or \fBc++\fR (default: \fBc\fR).
.TP
.B build.standard
Language standard (e.g. \fBc11\fR, \fBc17\fR, \fBc++20\fR; default: \fBc11\fR).
.TP
.B build.compiler
Compiler to use: \fBclang\fR, \fBgcc\fR, \fBcl\fR, \fBclang-cl\fR (default: \fBclang\fR).
.TP
.B build.kind
Output type: \fBbin\fR, \fBlib\fR (static or dynamic), \fBstaticlib\fR, \fBsharedlib\fR (default: \fBbin\fR).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I dcr.toml
Project manifest file.
.TP
.I ~/.dcr/config.toml
User-level DCR configuration.
.TP
.I ~/.dcr/index.json
Local registry index.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DCR_COMPILER
Override the compiler used for building.
.TP
.B DCR_CC
Alternative way to override the compiler.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Create a new project:
.B dcr new hello
.TP
Initialize from current directory:
.B dcr init
.TP
Build with release profile:
.B dcr build \-\-release
.TP
Cross-compile for Windows:
.B dcr build \-\-target windows
.TP
Add a dependency:
.BR "dcr add curl git:https://github.com/curl/curl" .
.TP
Generate VS Code integration:
.B dcr gen vscode
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR https://dcr.dexoron.su ", " https://github.com/dexoron/dcr
.SH AUTHORS
Dexoron (Bezotechestvo Vladimir) <main@dexoron.su>
